---
title: Environmental Data & Oracles Service
parent: Environmental Oracles
nav_order: 1
has_children: false
has_toc: false
---
## WYND Environmental Data & Oracles Service

WYND is committed to bring visibility to the environmental conditions 
by bringing the right data to measure the current state
appropriately. In order to achieve this, WYND is actively building data
services for fetching orbital (satellites) as well ground based data
from communities, organisations and volunteers.

There is now a critical need for an intelligent data system integrated
with a marketplace economy in order to fully leverage the vast potential
of these data sets. Satellite observations need ground data for
validation and calibration. Ground measurements on forest fires, land
cover changes and air pollution are critical to building a bridge
**between the global picture painted by the satellites and the
contextual reality of what actually happens on the ground.**
Additionally, data collected from different sources are sometimes
challenging to locate and to understand across diverse formats.
Published scientific analyses can be complex to reproduce for new use
cases, and are sometimes not easily comparable with other metrics and
algorithms. Many scientific data products do not follow common data
protocols, or even have a clean API to query for another task. Finally,
and perhaps most importantly, the collaborative sharing of data and
algorithms often stalls due to the challenge of incentivizing and
rewarding continued interest and community development. The
inconsistency of funding often precipitates the breakdown of
relationships between data users and providers due to funding
constraints, which eventually renders data sets
obsolete to operational management decisions and environmental action.

WYND data services is founded on the following tenants:

1)  simple trusted data

2)  reproducibility

3)  interoperability

4)  free exchange

5)  easy collaboration

This approach provides a foundation that will enable a multitude of
conservation and business applications focused on ecological health, as
well as turbo-charging research and analysis to advance the state of the
art.

### Open Data

**One essential aspect of this project is that all source data is
open.** This ensures we don't end up like another Microsoft Earth, a
pay-to-play initiative that many cannot access, and one organisation
controls. We are establishing a data commons and providing value-added
services on top of it. The original datasets we are working with are
often under some open licence. Generally, that would be Public Domain,
CC0, or CC-BY (attribution required), or even CC-BY-SA (share alike,
derivative work must also be open).

What this means, is that the original data (in increasingly normalised
format) will be available to all. The indexes to search and organise
such data will also be fully open, as well as the various algorithms we
use to process the data.

However, many projects uploading "ground truth" need continuous funding
to be sustainable. While we require all remote sensing data to be under
an open licence, we will allow such user-uploaded data to be non-open
source, as many groups are concerned about reuse without payments.

To provide a viable revenue stream for all data providers, we focus on
value-added products on top of the data. Other teams can build products
directly on the basic data for free, or pay to use these extensions.

### Data Value Enrichment###

WYND will collect user specific data and other open data sources and
perform the process of Extracting, Transforming and Loading data on base
map based on location index (H3 Index) of base map. Once this user
specific data is enriched utilising all other data sources, some extra
model weights may be applied by federated machine learning and deep
learning models for more enrichment of user published data. This new
fused dataset will then be used to calculate certain quality indexes to
represent a shareable user and site behaviour which changes over time.
This brings unprecedented visibility to the whole community about the
site and the data publishers.

Together the WYND aims to present a framework that serves as a market
for innovation, and which will evolve as observing techniques and
algorithms advance. Still, innovation will be contained within 3 basic
categories for descriptors and metrics of ecosystem health:

1.  Carbon / Living Biomass: these metrics describe the total mass of
    > living organisms in an area or region, and can be associated with
    > carbon stored in living plants.

2.  Biodiversity: these metrics represent the characterization of the
    > breadth of the varied species within a region or ecosystem,
    > including plant, animal, fungal, and microbial classifications.

3.  Degree of human intrusion: these metrics represent objective
    > measures of human presence and landscape alteration, and include
    > variables such as mining, logging, agricultural density and type,
    > road density, human population density and nighttime lights.

4.  Pollution: these metrics describe the degree of toxicity (i.e. the
    > ability to cause harmful effects over long periods), of the air,
    > water, or soil, often associated with foreign chemical
    > contamination.

These metric classifications were designed for their comprehensiveness
as well as for their orthogonality. They are comprehensive in that
together these metrics will conclusively describe the health of a region
or ecosystem. They are orthogonal in that it is possible that any one of
these metrics may change in isolation of the others. For instance, while
it is likely that many of these metrics would be consistent or
correlated for an impacted region (e.g. the city of Los Angeles), it is
possible that environmental action may shift only one (e.g. with a
conversion to electric vehicles, the pollution metric alone may
improve). As we consider a rapidly changing ecosystem, it is likely that
these metrics could evolve independently or in sequence but may not be
temporally or spatially correlated.

---\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\-\--
